abstract:Score matching estimators have gained widespread attention in recent years partly
because they are free from calculating the integral of normalizing constant, thereby
addressing the computational challenges in maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
Some existing works have proposed score matching estimators for point processes.
However, this work demonstrates that the incompleteness of the estimators proposed in those works renders them applicable only to specific problems, and they
fail for more general point processes. To address this issue, this work introduces
the weighted score matching estimator to point processes. Theoretically, we prove
the consistency of our estimator and establish its rate of convergence. Experimental results indicate that our estimator accurately estimates model parameters on
synthetic data and yields results consistent with MLE on real data. In contrast,
existing score matching estimators fail to perform effectively.

introduction:Point processes are a class of statistical models used to characterize event occurrences. Typical models
include Poisson processes [9] and Hawkes processes [3]. Their applications span various fields such as
seismology [16; 17], finance [1; 4], criminology [15], and neuroscience [11; 26]. In the field of point
processes, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) has been a conventional estimator. However, MLE
has an inherent limitation: it requires the computation of the normalizing constant, which corresponds
to the intensity integral term in the likelihood. Except for simple cases, calculating the intensity
integral analytically is generally infeasible. This necessitates the use of numerical integration methods
like Monte Carlo or quadrature for approximating the computation. This introduces approximation
errors, and more importantly, for high-dimensional problems, numerical integration encounters the
curse of dimensionality, rendering training infeasible.

To address this issue, prior research has introduced the concept of score matching (SM) [5] to the field
of point processes. For instance, [18] derived the application of SM to the estimation of traditional
statistical Poisson processes. Furthermore, [24] extended the use of SM to the estimation of deep
covariate spatio-temporal point processes. [10] also generalized the application of SM to Hawkes
processes. These works have greatly advanced the utilization of SM for point processes. However, in
practical applications, we have found that these estimators only work for specific point processes.
For more general cases, these estimators cannot accurately estimate model parameters, even for
some simple statistical point processes. One of the core contribution of this work is to theoretically
demonstrate the incompleteness of the estimators proposed in the aforementioned studies.

The incompleteness of the estimators in the aforementioned studies stems from the transition from
explicit SM to implicit SM. The explicit SM estimates model parameters by minimizing the expected
distance between the gradient of the log-density of the model and the gradient of the log-density of
the data. However, we cannot directly minimize the above objective function since it depends on
the unknown data distribution. To facilitate solving, we need to convert the above explicit SM to
implicit SM by using a trick of integration by parts, provided that some regularity conditions are
satisfied [5]. In [18; 24; 10], they assume that the required regularity conditions are satisfied in their
point process models and directly employ the implicit SM objective. However, as demonstrated in
Section 3, the required regularity conditions cannot be met for general point processes. This implies
that the concise implicit SM objectives (Equation (2) in [18], Equation (10) in [24], Equation (4) in
[10]) are incomplete, and they cannot accurately estimate parameters for general point processes.

To address this issue, this work introduces a (autoregressive) weighted score matching (WSM)
estimator that can be applied to more general point processes. WSM eliminates the intractable terms
in SM objective by adding a weight function that takes zero at the boundary of the integration region.
Compared to previous work on WSM [6; 22; 12], we are the first work to apply WSM on a stochastic
process where the dimension NT is also random. This stochasticity in dimensionality poses greater
challenges to the derivation, requiring special treatment to address this issue.
Specifically, we make following contributions: (1) We theoretically demonstrate that implicit (autoregressive) SM estimators in [18; 24; 10] are incomplete because the required regularity conditions
cannot be satisfied for general point processes. (2) To address this issue, we propose a (autoregressive) WSM estimator that is applicable to general point processes. Theoretically, we establish its
consistency and convergence rate. (3) In experiments, we confirm that on synthetic data, (autoregressive) WSM successfully recovers the ground-truth parameters; on real data, (autoregressive) WSM
estimates results consistent with MLE; while existing (autoregressive) SM estimator fails in both
scenarios.